AENEID BOOK VII

⁴⁷⁶ While Turnus fills the Rutuli with dai-ing

courage, Allecto on Stygian wing speeds toward the
Trojans, with new wiles spying out the place, where,
011 the shore, fair Iiilus was hunting wild beasts
with nets and steeds. Here the hellish maid flings
upon his hounds a sudden frenzy‚ and touches their
nostrils with the well-known scent, so that in hot
haste they course a stag. This was the first source
of ill; this first kindled the rustic spirit to war.
There was 3 stag of wondrous beauty and mighty
antlers, which, torn from the mother's breast, the
sons of Tyrrhus nurtured, and Tyrrhus, their sire,
controller of the royal herds, and charged with care
of pastures near and far. Their sister Silvia had
trained him to obey, and with constant love she
adorned him, twining his horns with soft garlands,
combing the wild thing’s eoat, and laving him in the
crystal spring. He, patient of her hand, and accus-
tomed to his master's board, roved the woods, and of
his own accord betook himself home again to the
well-known door, howe'er late the night.

⁴⁹³ While far afield the stag was straying, the
maddened hounds of the huntsman Iiilus started
him, as haply he floated down stream and cooled
his heat on the grassy bank. Ascanius himself, too,
fired with longing for chiefest honour, aiined a shaft
from his bent bow, nor did the goddess fail his
salter-ing hand ; the reed sped with a ioud whiz, and
pierced belly and flank alike. But the wounded
creature fled under the familiar roof, and moaning
crept into liis stall, where, bleeding and suppliant-
like, he filled all the house with his plainLS. First
Silvia the sister, beating her arnis with her hands,
calls for help and summotis the hardy country-folk.
They—for the fell fiend lui-ks in the silent woods—

