AENEID BOOK XI

when, by Padusa’s fish-filled stream, hoarse-throated
swans scream among the clamorous pools. “Nay,
citizens,” eries Turnus, seizing the moment, “con-
vene a eouncil, and sit praising peace3 yonder they
rush upon the realm in arms.” No more he spake, but
up he sprang, and sped swiftly forth from the high
halls. “ Thou, Volusus,’' he eries, “bid the Volscian
squadrons arm, and lead out the Rutulians! Thou,
Messapus, and thou, Coras, with thy brother, spread
the horsemen under arms over the broad plains. Let
some guard the city gates and man the towers; let
the rest charge with me, where 1 shall command.''
⁴¹⁶⁸ At once from all the city there is a rush to the
walls. Lord Latinus himself, dismayed by the disas-
trous hour, quits the council and postpones his high
designs, oft chiding himself that he gave not ready
welcome to Dardan Aeneas, nor, for his city's salx-e,
adopted him as son. Others (lig trenches before the
gates or shoulder stones and stakes. The hoarse
clarion gives bloody signal for battle. Then lo! a
motley ring of matrons and boys girdle the walls;
the final struggle summons all. Moreover the queen,
with a great throng of mothers, ridesl up to the
temple of Pallas and her towered heights, bearing
gifts, and at her side the maid Lavinia, source of all
that woe, her beauteous eyes downeast. Ascending,
the matrons fill the temple with smoke of incense and
from the high threshold pour sad lamentations : “ O
mighty in arms, mistress in war, Tritonian maid,
break with thine hand the spear of the Phrygian
pirate, hurl him prone to earth and stretch him pros-
trate beneath our lofty gates.” As for Turnus, he,
with emulous fury, girds himself for the fray, And
now he has donned his flashing breastplate and

² Even as the Roman matrona rode in pilenta in their
sacred processions (cs. Aen. VIII. 555).

267

