AENEID BOOK IX

delight to brave all chances. Yet now they fail ; for
where a massed throng threatens, the Teucrians roll
up and hurl down a mighty mass, that laid low the
Rutulians far and wide and broke their coverlet of
armour. Nor do the bold Rutuli-ans care longer to
contend in blind warfare, but strive with darts to
clear the ramparts. Elsewhere, grim to behold,
Mezentius was brandishing his* Etruscan pine and
hurls smoking brand33 while Messapus, the seed of
Neptune, tamer of horses, tears down the rampart
and calls for ladders to mount the battlements.¹

⁵²⁵ Do thou, O Calliope, thou and thy sisters, l
pray, inspire me while Ι sing, what slaughter‚ what
deaths, Turnus dealt on that day, and whom each
warrior sent down to doom; and unroll with me the
mighty scroll of war.

⁶³⁰ A tower loomed high above, with lofty gang-
ways,² posted on vantage-ground, which all the
Italians strove with utmost strength to storm, and
with utmost force of skill to overthrow: the Tro-
jans in turn made defence with stones, and hurled
showers of darts through the open loopholes. First
Turnus flung a blazing torch and made fast its fire in
the side; this, fanned by the wind, seized the planks
and lodged in the gateways it consumed. Within,
troubled and terrified, men vainly seek escape from
disaster. While they huddle close and fall back to
the side free from ruin, lo l under the sudden weight
the tower fell, and all the sky thunders with the
crash. Half dead they come to the ground, the
monstrous mass behind them, pierced by their own
shafts, and their breasts impaled by the cruel splin-
ters. Scarcely do Helenor and Lycus alone escape·—
Helenor ln prime of youth, whom a Licymnian slave

² cs. Aen. vn. 691. ¹ See note on 170 above. 49
1

